DOCS-2254: Add debug endpoints documentation for viam-server (#4317)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/operate/reference/viam-server/debug-endpoints.md

---
title: "Debug Endpoints"
linkTitle: "Debug Endpoints"
weight: 130
type: "docs"
description: "Advanced debugging endpoints available in viam-server for troubleshooting and development."
date: "2025-05-19"
---

The RDK (Robot Development Kit) that powers `viam-server` includes several debug endpoints that expose server internals.
These endpoints can be helpful during development or when troubleshooting complex issues:

- [`pprof`](#pprof)
- [`graph`](#graph)

## `pprof`

> Setting `enable_web_profile` to `true` in your machine configuration allows you to visualize runtime profiling data in the localhost browser.

Reviewer: I assume that "in the localhost browser" means that you can open a locally hosted webpage that displays profiling data. Probably better to word it that way!

> The pprof tool provides valuable insights into your application's performance, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pprof tool provides the following information about machine performance:
```
[s] remove editorialization, provide a more descriptive introduction for the bulleted list

- CPU usage
- Memory allocation
- Goroutine blocking
- Execution tracing

> This information can be particularly useful when:
> - Diagnosing performance bottlenecks
> - Investigating memory leaks
> - Understanding resource usage patterns
> - Troubleshooting high CPU or memory usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Duplicated information from the troubleshooting page. I don't think it adds any value here; anyone who's reading this page should already know the value of this information!

For more detailed information on using pprof, refer to the [Go pprof documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http/pprof).

### Configuration

To enable the pprof endpoints, set `enable_web_profile` to `true` in your machine configuration:

> 1. Navigate to the **CONFIGURE** tab of your machine in the Viam app
> 2. Click on the **...** menu next to your machine part in the left-hand menu
> 3. Select **Edit JSON**
> 4. Add the `enable_web_profile` field at the root level of your configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the **CONFIGURE** tab of your machine in the Viam app
1. Click on the **...** menu next to your machine part in the left-hand menu
1. Select **Edit JSON**
1. Add the `enable_web_profile` field at the root level of your configuration:
```
[s] pet peeve of mine: never number ordered lists, always becomes a pain eventually. Maybe we can supplement the ai prompt with that instruction?

```json
{
  "components": [...],
  "services": [...],
  "enable_web_profile": true
}
```

### Available Endpoints

Once enabled, you can access the pprof interface by navigating to `https://localhost:8080/debug/pprof/` in your browser.

The following pprof routes are available:

1. `/debug/pprof/cmdline` - Command line arguments used to start the process
2. `/debug/pprof/profile` - CPU profile data (30-second sample by default)
3. `/debug/pprof/symbol` - Symbol lookup for program counters
4. `/debug/pprof/trace` - Execution trace data

## `graph`

The `/debug/graph` endpoint shows a graphical representation of the machine resources managed by the RDK.

> The graph is created using [graphviz](https://graphviz.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
While I care, I don't think the end user cares.

> You can access this endpoint by navigating to `https://localhost:8080/debug/graph` in your browser when connected to a machine running `viam-server`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access this endpoint, visit `https://localhost:8080/debug/graph` on the machine.
```
why use more word when few word do trick?

### Layout Options

> You can specify different [layouts](https://graphviz.org/docs/layouts/) by passing in the query parameter `?layout=LAYOUT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To view different [layouts](https://graphviz.org/docs/layouts/), use the `layout` query parameter:
```
I'm not sure the example adds much here, since we have a full URL example below.

The default and best supported layout is `dot`.

> For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example URL specifies the `circo` layout:
```
[s] improve introduction for the example by explaining what the example is demonstrating

```
https://localhost:8080/debug/graph?layout=circo
```

Available layout options include:

> - `dot` (default) - Hierarchical layout
> - `neato` - Spring model layout
> - `fdp` - Force-directed layout
> - `sfdp` - Multiscale version of fdp for large graphs
> - `circo` - Circular layout
> - `twopi` - Radial layout
> - `osage` - Array-based layout
> - `text` - raw [DOT](https://graphviz.org/doc/info/lang.html) text of the graphfor use with 3rd-party service or tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dot` (default): Hierarchical layout
- `neato`: Spring model layout
- `fdp`: Force-directed layout
- `sfdp`: Multiscale version of fdp for large graphs
- `circo`: Circular layout
- `twopi`: Radial layout
- `osage`: Array-based layout
- `text`: raw [DOT](https://graphviz.org/doc/info/lang.html) text of the graph, for use with external tools
```
[s] prefer colons, fix typo, say 'external' instead of '3rd-party'

> ## Security Considerations
> 
> {{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}
> The debug endpoints expose internal details about your machine's configuration and runtime behavior. Only enable these endpoints in development or controlled environments. In production environments, these endpoints should be disabled or properly secured.
> {{< /alert >}}
> 
> When using these debug endpoints:
> 
> 1. Ensure your machine is not exposed to untrusted networks
> 2. Disable the endpoints when not actively debugging
> 3. Consider using a secure tunnel or VPN when accessing these endpoints remotely
> 4. Be aware that the data exposed may include sensitive information about your machine's configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}
The debug endpoints expose internal details about your machine's configuration and runtime behavior.
Only enable these endpoints in development environments.

{{< /alert >}}
```

[s] one sentence per line, remove redundant sentence -- the previous sentence should make it clear that if you ever enable this in a production environment, you should do so only briefly and under highly controlled circumstances

All of the suggestions outside of the admonition are so generic as to be useless, so we should eliminate them. Consequently, we can also remove the section header, leaving the admonition at the end of the previous section and page.

The pprof tool provides the following information about machine performance:

- CPU usage
- Memory allocation
- Goroutine blocking
- Execution tracing

For more detailed information on using pprof, refer to the [Go pprof documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http/pprof).

### Configuration

To enable the pprof endpoints, set `enable_web_profile` to `true` in your machine configuration:

1. Navigate to the **CONFIGURE** tab of your machine in the Viam app
1. Click on the **...** menu next to your machine part in the left-hand menu
1. Select **Edit JSON**
1. Add the `enable_web_profile` field at the root level of your configuration:

```json
{
  "components": [...],
  "services": [...],
  "enable_web_profile": true
}
```

{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}
The debug endpoints expose internal details about your machine's configuration and runtime behavior.
Only enable these endpoints in development environments.
{{< /alert >}}

### Available Endpoints

Once enabled, you can access the pprof interface by navigating to `https://localhost:8080/debug/pprof/` in your browser.

The following pprof routes are available:

> 1. `/debug/pprof/cmdline`: Command line arguments used to start the process
> 2. `/debug/pprof/profile`: CPU profile data (30-second sample by default)
> 3. `/debug/pprof/symbol`: Symbol lookup for program counters
> 4. `/debug/pprof/trace`: Execution trace data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `/debug/pprof/cmdline`: Command line arguments used to start the process
- `/debug/pprof/profile`: CPU profile data (30-second sample by default)
- `/debug/pprof/symbol`: Symbol lookup for program counters
- `/debug/pprof/trace`: Execution trace data
```
[s] no need to order these!
